This article was downloaded by:[Purdue University Libraries]
On: 20 April 2008
Access Details: [subscription number 790943733]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Research on Language & Social
Interaction
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t775653697
Social Meanings in German Interactions: An
Ethnographic Analysis of the Second-Person Pronoun
Sie
Michaela R. Winchatz a
a Department of Speech Communication, Southern Illinois University.
Online Publication Date: 01 July 2001
To cite this Article: Winchatz, Michaela R. (2001) 'Social Meanings in German
Interactions: An Ethnographic Analysis of the Second-Person Pronoun Sie',
Research on Language & Social Interaction, 34:3, 337 - 369
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1207/S15327973RLSI34-3_3
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/S15327973RLSI34-3_3
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be
complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be
independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or
arising out of the use of this material.
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Social Meanings in German Interactions:
An Ethnographic Analysis of the
Second-Person Pronoun Sie
Michaela R. Winchatz
Department of Speech Communication
Southern Illinois University
The German 2nd-person pronoun Sie was used as a communicative resource to investigate
social meanings in the talk of German native speakers. Two types of data
were used for the analysis of social meanings: (a) transcriptions of semistructured,
in-depth interviews conducted with 50 German native speakers of varying gender,
age, and occupation and (b) field notes from participant observations taken of naturally
occurring interactions in public and private spheres over a 10-month period in
and around the town of Landau, Germany. A total of 25 social meanings were found
to be salient in the talk of the German interlocutors. The results were then used to
test the adequacy of 2-, 3-, and even multidimensional explanatory models of social
meaning that continue to dominate the current literature. Due to the apparent inadequacy
of current models in their representation of both the complexity and distinctiveness
of social meanings, the call is made to turn to more interpretive,
ethnographic approaches for the discovery of meaning systems. This study suggests
the practical utility in examining speakers’ and hearers’ own situated interpretations
This article is based on my dissertation research (University of Washington, 1997), which was
funded by a grant from Der Deutsche Akademische Austauschdienst (DAAD). I would like to
thank Gerry Philipsen, Kristine Fitch, Karen Tracy, and anonymous reviewers for providing
valuable comments on earlier versions of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be sent to Michaela R. Winchatz, Department
of Speech Communication, Southern Illinois University, Mailcode 6605, Carbondale, IL
62901–6605. E-mail: winchatz@siu.edu.
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 34(3), 337–369
Copyright © 2001, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
of their experiences of communicative forms as a means of revealing the rich nuances
of social meaning often hidden in our present-day parsimonious models.
For several decades, a central issue in the study of human communication
has been how interlocutors express their understandings of their
relationships to one another (Bochner, Kaminski, & Fitzpatrick, 1977;
Burgoon & Hale, 1984, 1987; Watzlawick, Beavin, & Jackson, 1967).
These authors, as well as others in a variety of fields, made the point that in
human interaction, every communicative act encodes both a referential
meaning and a social meaning (the latter is designated by various names;
e.g., relational, presentational, or interpersonal meaning). One useful characterization
of social meaning was provided by Parkinson (1985), who
said that the social meaning of a communicative act expresses “who the
speaker believes he is, who he believes the addressee is, what he thinks
their relationship is, and what he thinks he is doing by saying what he is
saying” (p. 5).
One particularly rich resource for studying social meaning has been
the second-person pronoun, particularly as it is used in personal address.
Danziger (1976) stated that there are many concrete examples of the presentation
of interpersonal relationships in interlocutors’ daily communication;
however, “the analysis of the rules of personal address probably
constitutes the most developed part of this field of study” (p. 38). Indeed,
due to the plethora of terms of address studies, with many emphasizing
pronouns of address, there is already much known about the uses and
functions of the second-person pronoun in social interaction, with studies
based on many different languages and societies. For example, following
the classic studies by Brown and Gilman (1960) and Brown and Ford
(1961), research on personal address has been conducted in a wide range
of languages such as Egyptian Arabic (Parkinson, 1985), German
(Amendt, 1995; Delisle, 1986; Kempf, 1985), Hindi (Misra, 1977), Icelandic
(Haugen, 1975), Italian (Bates & Benigni, 1975), Javanese (Geertz,
1960), Spanish (Fitch, 1991, 1998), Swedish (Paulston, 1976), and Yiddish
(Slobin, 1963) to name a few. Developments in terms of address use
due to political change has been researched in languages such as Chinese
(Zhucheng, 1991) and Iranian-Persian (Keshavarz, 1988). The use of
terms of address in political discourse was studied by de Fina (1995) for
Mexican and English. Other authors compiled annotated bibliographies of
address term research (Philipsen & Huspek, 1985) and produced works
that examine various aspects of address theory in different languages
(Braun, 1988; Mühlhäuser & Harré, 1990).
338 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
One reason theorists have been interested in the personal pronoun is
because it has provided a powerful entry point to understanding the dimensions
of social relationships. Specifically, in his classic treatise on social
psychology, Brown (1965) was one of the first to propose a concrete
link between pronouns of address and social meaning. Based on studies of
the social meanings expressed in speakers’ use of pronouns of address, including
the germinal Brown and Gilman (1960), Brown proposed that all
expressions of social meaning can be mapped onto a two-dimensional
space with the vertical axis being power and the horizontal axis being solidarity.
1 In other words, Brown’s theory suggested that there exist two semantic
dimensions of social meaning that are universal to all languages
and along which all expressions of social meaning can be located in semantic
space.
Brown and Gilman (1960) defined the power semantic as asymmetrical.
When an imbalance of power is symbolized in speech, it is usually
done by those with more power using the informal pronoun and receiving
the formal pronoun from those with less power. The solidarity semantic,
on the other hand, represents more balance between individuals and is
symmetrical. Brown and Gilman wrote: “The similarities that matter [for
the solidarity semantic] seem to be those that make for like-mindedness or
similar behavior dispositions” (p. 258). Interlocutors often symbolize solidarity
in speech by sharing either the informal or the formal pronoun of
address with one another.
Other researchers also proposed a two-dimensional model as an effective
way to describe how people relate to one another. For example,
Birtchnell (1993) proposed a model that includes two axes of relating: the
proximity axis and the power axis. The ends of the power axis are
upperness, “relating from a position of relative strength” and lowerness,
“relating from a position of relative weakness” (p. 40). The proximity axis
is defined by the endpoints closeness or “becoming involved” and distance
or “remaining separate” (p. 40).
Although authors such as Brown (1965), Brown and Gilman (1960),
and Birtchnell (1993) have been proponents of the two-dimensional model
of social meaning, several theorists have challenged its adequacy (see
Burgoon & Hale, 1984, 1987; Danziger, 1976; Friedrich, 1972; Mehrabian,
1971). These challenges have consistently taken one of two forms.
The existing studies that point to the inadequacy of two universal semantic
dimensions of social meaning provide either no explicit theoretical challenge
based on the data provided, or they provide an explicit theoretical
Social Meanings in German Interactions 339
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
challenge of the two-dimensional model without basing the challenge in
concrete data from observed actual interactions between interlocutors.
Also, each of these approaches share in the correlational assumption that
when a particular pronominal form is used in a particular context, this results
in a fixed and stable social meaning. In other words, “a deterministic
relationship [is] assumed between social meaning and personal address
choice” (Sequeira, 1993, p. 260).
Despite the various implicit and explicit challenges to two-dimensional
theories of social meaning such as Brown’s (1965), his particular
model continues to be used by researchers. For example, Hudson’s (1996,
pp. 230–243) Sociolinguistics, a prominent work in the area of language
and society, devoted a substantial number of pages to Brown and Gilman’s
(1960) study on the semantics of power and solidarity and described these
as semantic universals for languages throughout the world. Foley’s (1997)
Anthropological Linguistics followed suit, providing a lengthy discussion
of these as universal dimensions. More specifically, both authors explicitly
linked the two dimensions to second-person pronominal use. It would
appear, then, that the original semantic dimensions of power and solidarity
still hold a prominent place in scholars’ theoretical understandings of social
meanings and pronouns of address in the languages of the world.
Theorists such as Brown (1965), Birtchnell (1993), Danziger (1976),
and others who promoted the notion of “an indexical correlation between
the social context of a given linguistic interaction and the linguistic forms
used” (Foley, 1997, p. 313), have been criticized for their deterministic view
of speakers’ communicative choices (Kendall, 1981; Sequeira, 1993). For
all the explanatory parsimony that two- or three-dimensional theories provide,
they do not account for the varied and nuanced meanings that speakers
understand themselves to be negotiating in their daily interactions.
Whereas previous researchers have abstracted from aggregated patterns
of use or responses to survey questions about language, other researchers
of language and social interaction have been particularly
interested in examining the meaning of particular communicative acts to
those who use and produce them (Hymes, 1972, 1974; Philipsen, 1992).
This has been true, to a limited extent, in studies of personal address, including
studies of the use and meanings of second-person pronouns in social
interaction (Banks, 1989; Fitch, 1991, 1998; Leeds-Hurwitz, 1989;
Sequeira, 1993). Recently, Cameron (1997) advocated that researchers
take an alternative to what she called the “correlational fallacy” (p. 59). As
have other scholars, she proposed that researchers take as their starting
340 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
point an examination of the standpoint of the language user. Many years
ago Hymes (1972) called for researchers to examine the “means of speech
[. . .] and their meanings to those who use them” (p. 2). Such an interpretive
research approach would focus on the variety of meanings speakers
bring to their interactions and, in turn, would open up a way to get at the
nuanced particulars of social meaning that present-day theories ignore
(Philipsen, 1992).
The approaches to social meaning that have most heavily influenced
research on the use and functions of second-person pronouns continue to
rely most heavily on the correlational, parsimonious models exemplified
by Brown’s (1965) early approach. Although these approaches have taken
us a great way in discovering the social meanings expressed in secondperson
pronouns, in a variety of languages and societies, our literature
does not fully explore speakers’ and hearers’ own situated interpretations
of their experiences of these communicative forms. This leaves open the
question of whether there are situated meanings experienced by those who
produce and use these forms that are not adequately captured by the dominant
explanatory models.
The study reported here responds to this concern by performing a
grounded analysis of German speakers’ situated experiences of the second-
person pronoun Sie. In examining what social meanings German interlocutors
express and interpret through one linguistic form, we can
ultimately reveal the adequacy of our present-day models as guides for
making these interpretations. This study stems from a larger research project
that explored the social meanings of both the informal and formal second-
person German pronouns du and Sie (Winchatz, 1997). Specifically,
the larger study revealed a total of 39 social meanings that were found salient
in the talk of German native speakers (i.e., 17 social meanings were
found salient for both the pronouns du and Sie, 8 social meanings were
found salient exclusively for the formal pronoun Sie, and 14 social meanings
were found salient exclusively for the informal pronoun du). Although
the study reported here takes into account only those social
meanings that interlocutors revealed in their talk about the formal secondperson
pronoun Sie, it should be noted that as interlocutors face choices to
use one pronoun as opposed to another in interactions, their communicative
decisions are always based in their understandings of all of the pronominal
choices available to them. Consequently, German speakers’ talk
about the social meanings they express with the formal pronoun Sie is often
accomplished by setting up comparisons with and drawing contrasts to
Social Meanings in German Interactions 341
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
their use of the informal pronoun du. However, by focusing on one specific
linguistic form available to German interlocutors (Sie), rather than
two linguistic forms (du and Sie), a more detailed, focused account of
speakers’ interpretations of their communicative choices can be provided.
Thus, this study provides descriptions and interpretations of the richly
nuanced understandings German speakers have of the formal secondperson
pronoun Sie, while simultaneously providing a starting point to test
the adequacy of extant models of social meaning.
METHOD
I conducted ethnographic research for a 10-month period (from September
1995 to August 1996), primarily in the town of Landau, Germany,
during which I collected both interview materials and participant observations
on German speakers’ pronoun use. Landau has a population of approximately
40,000 and is located in the southwest region of Germany in the
German state of Rhineland-Palatinate (Rheinland-Pfalz). The town is approximately
25 miles east of the French border and lies between the town of
Neustadt in the north and the city of Karlsruhe in the south. In-depth,
semistructured interviews were conducted with 50 German native speakers
of varying age, gender, occupation, and class. In addition, field notes from
participant observations in both public (restaurants, stores, university classrooms,
etc.) and private settings were recorded throughout the 10 months.
The type of interviews conducted for this study are what Hammersley
and Atkinson (1995) described as “reflexive interviewing” in contrast
with “standardized interviewing” (p. 152). In reflexive interviewing, the
ethnographer usually enters the interview with a list of particular issues he
or she wishes to cover and adopts “a more flexible approach, allowing the
discussion to flow in a way that seems natural” (p. 152). Specifically, this
means that the ethnographer will not necessarily ask each interviewee the
same questions and will not follow any fixed order of topics. Thus, the
goal is to uncover participants’ understandings and to probe native categories
and meanings.
I conducted interviews with single individuals, pairs, and groups, so
that there were a total of 24 interviews conducted across 50 participants.
The length of the interviews ranged from a minimum of 25 min to a maximum
of 1 hr, 50 min each. After responding to initial questions relating to
342 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
demographic information, interviewees were asked to think about situations
they had encountered in their lives in which the decision of whether to
use du or Sie was a difficult one for them. As an alternate line of thought, I
asked for stories of situations in which the participants had, at one time or
another, experienced being addressed by another interlocutor with a pronoun
that they were not expecting. Once a participant began to recount these
mentioned situations, I asked probing questions that ultimately guided the
interviewees to express the particular social meanings that they attributed to
the pronominal choices of themselves or others. The goal of the probing
questions was to use only those terms actually spoken by the participants, as
much as possible, without forcing my own terms or meanings on them. The
interviews did not consist exclusively of such stories; however, I found that
asking the participants to talk about these situations provided them with a
helpful theme to guide their discussion of the topic.
The use of interviews for investigating phenomena such as social
meanings is often critiqued for only serving as “flawed cues to the system,
best ignored or discarded in favor of other forms of evidence” (Hanks,
1993, p. 129). Hanks argued, however,
If we assume an objectivist stance towards verbal interaction, then native views can
never provide more than a deflected representation of the system. If, on the other
hand, we assume an interpretive stance, [. . .] then we would expect native talk about
talk to reveal principles and schematic resources at play in a wide variety of contexts.
(p. 130)
Native speakers do have relatively systematic ideas about the ways they
use language and what these uses mean to them. Hanks referred to speakers’
“metalinguistic common sense” and by using methods such as interviewing,
researchers can get at “direct evidence of [. . . speakers’]
interpretive frames” (p. 129).
The researcher who relies on elicitation methods such as interviewing
may obscure “the dynamic relation whereby language and context create
and reflect social meaning in spontaneous and unpredictable ways”
(Mertz, 1993, p. 159). Although Mertz’s point is well taken, interview
methods can get at native speakers’ understandings of what certain linguistic
actions mean in certain situations. These native understandings are
what guide the intentions reflected in and interpretations of communication
in every interaction. Native understandings of the types of expressible
social meanings that exist are of great importance to researchers whose
goal is to uncover what interlocutors intend to communicate and interpret
Social Meanings in German Interactions 343
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
others to be communicating to them. Although interviewing is not the only
method one can use to uncover a complex phenomenon such as social
meaning, and it is not the only approach taken in this study, it is a method
that can uncover some very real native participant understandings of communication;
that is, speakers’ linguistic common sense.
As a second source of materials, I collected field notes of participant
observations taken over the 10-month period I lived in Landau, Germany.
The notes helped me to make sense of, as well as compare and contrast,
the information collected within the interviews. During this period of
research, I systematically recorded my observations of German speakers’
use of personal pronouns with specific emphasis on any metacommunicative
discourse I heard in everyday talk about the social meanings of the
personal pronouns du and Sie. Participant observation is a method that goes
hand in hand with ethnography’s commitment to “uncovering and depicting
indigenous meanings” (Emerson, Fretz, & Shaw, 1995, p. 12). When using
participant observation, then, the ethnographer’s goal is “ultimately to get
close to those studied as a way of understanding what their experiences and
activities mean to them” (p. 12). Participant observation proved to be an excellent
complementary method to interviewing, as I was able to observe
firsthand the types of situations that German speakers described in their interviews
and compare my observations of everyday communicative behavior
to their understandings and descriptions of such behavior.
After obtaining the interview data, all interviews were fully transcribed
with a focus on content. Because the goal of this study was to elicit
expressions of social meanings, the transcription technique employed allowed
for details such as verbal fillers and overlaps to be recorded; however,
details such as pause length, elongation of vowels, in or out breaths,
and so forth were not transcribed. Each line of the transcriptions was numbered
so that tracing of words and phrases that were later extracted from
the interview data was possible. This transcription process resulted in approximately
250 pages of transcribed talk.
The interview transcriptions and participant observation field notes
were then searched for words and phrases that uttered what the pronouns
Sie expressed for the participants themselves. This was the only category I
had preset before beginning my analysis, and it was my main analytical
category. I began the analysis by combing through each line of talk in both
data sets (interviews and field notes) two times. With each close reading, I
searched for words and phrases from interviews and naturally occurring talk
that expressed what the pronoun Sie meant to the participants. As I found
344 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
these words and phrases, I extracted them from the interviews and field
notes and cataloged them in a separate file that included the word or phrase
itself, who uttered the word or phrase, and in which interview or field note
the utterance occurred. This type of cataloging allowed for cross-checking
and tracing of the extracted utterances at later points in the analysis.
As I combed through each interview and field note twice, line by line,
for utterances from participants of what the pronoun Sie expresses, I noticed
other salient categories in the interview materials. These categories
were related to my initial, preset search of words and phrases in that they
illuminated or expanded on them in various ways. I refined and searched
for instances of these new, emergent categories during the first two readings
of the two data sets. Once the focus and boundaries of these new categories
had been set, I combed through each of the interviews and field
notes a third time to make sure that I had collected all the instances available
from the materials. During this detailed third reading of the materials,
I continued to conduct cross-checks of the categories that guided my analysis
to make sure that my cataloging of utterances was complete.
THE SOCIAL MEANINGS SALIENT FOR THE
FORMAL PRONOUN SIE
In the following, I discuss the expressed and expressible social meanings
found salient in the talk of the participants for the formal pronoun Sie;
that is, what German native speakers understand themselves to be expressing
about their relationships when they employ the use of the formal pronoun
Sie in their daily interactions. When I refer to a social meaning’s
salience, I refer to the prominence or noticeability of a particular term in
the transcribed talk or participant observations, or both, of the participants
in this study.
An ethnography of communication approach (Hymes, 1962) emphasizes
the discovery of locally managed systems of speaking. Once these
systems are located and interpreted, they may be used to help shape larger
metatheories of human communication. In the study reported here, an attempt
is made to meet both of these goals. First, an overview of the social
meanings expressed by German speakers through the use of the formal
second-person pronoun Sie is provided. Second, the social meanings
found for the pronoun Sie are then applied to extant models of social
meaning to test their adequacy for the German case.
Social Meanings in German Interactions 345
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
The following 25 expressed social meanings were found to be salient
in the talk of the participants for the formal pronoun Sie: age, adulthood,
anger, arrogance, authority, closeness, coldness, conversableness, dignity,
distance, frequency of contact, friendship, intimacy, isolation, knowing
other, liking, personal, politeness, power, rejection, relationship, respect,
solidarity, status, and structured. In the following, I discuss each of these
social meanings in terms of their nuances and values, using verbatim descriptions
from the German interviewees and quotes from observed interactions
whenever possible.2 Many narrative examples that were provided
by the participants are also included, which allows the reader to place the
social meanings into the situated contexts that made them relevant to the
speakers.
Age. The pronoun Sie can be used to express an age difference between
a speaker and the other individual with whom he or she speaks. The
speaker is understood to be the point of reference, in that he or she chooses
to employ the Sie pronoun with another individual by deciding whether
the other person is older or younger than him- or herself. In reference to
the age (Alter) of the speaker, a Sie pronoun can express that another person
is of the same age or older than the speaker.
The participants in this study revealed that they would use the pronoun
Sie with people who are “older” (“älter”) than themselves. For example,
Janosch, age 24, stated the rule, “Whoever is much older than you
are, you have to speak to them with Sie.” Some participants also revealed
that when they received the Sie pronoun from other speakers that they felt
“a little bit too old” (“ein bißchen zu alt”). This latter meaning was expressed
by 40- and 50-year-old participants, as well as participants in their
20s and 30s. It appears that the pronoun Sie carries with it a connotation
for some interlocutors that one’s addressee can be graded in terms of the
social category of age.
Adulthood. Adulthood (Erwachsenenalter) is related to the social
meaning of age. To be counted legally as an adult, one must reach a given
age, depending on the laws of a particular country. There is, however,
much more to adulthood than simply how old a person is. Adulthood carries
with it images of an individual who is grown up, both physically and
mentally, allowing for a certain level of maturity to have been reached.
When a girl or boy reaches adulthood, there are expectations from society
and responsibilities that come along with the territory. If the boy or girl
346 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
does not fulfill these expectations or carry out the responsibilities, he or
she is most likely still considered a child and not an adult.
For many participants, the formal pronoun Sie can be used to express
the social meaning adulthood. Many respondents stated such general rules
as, “Principally I would speak to an adult person using Sie” (Mary, age
54). The need to express that someone is an adult, however, lies close to
speakers’ wishes to show a younger individual a certain level of dignity
that often accompanies becoming an adult.
Johann, age 57, is a high school teacher, who, during his many years
of teaching, has used the informal pronoun du with many of his students.
One afternoon, while accompanying Johann to the store, we met a young
woman in her early 20s with whom Johann engaged in a brief conversation.
He addressed the woman with Sie; however, it was apparent from the
conversation that she had previously been his student. Having knowledge
of Johann’s practice of using du with his students, I asked him the reason
for his use of Sie in this situation. He explained that whenever he met students
who had already finished school and graduated, he no longer used
the informal pronoun with these ex-students, but rather the formal pronoun
Sie. Johann stated, “With this [use of Sie] I recognize that they are no
longer my students, they are adults.” There is a figurative rite of passage
(e.g., from child to adult) that Johann and many other participants wish to
acknowledge to younger people by this particular use of Sie. It is a level of
accomplishment, deserving of acknowledgment that can only be expressed
through the formal second-person pronoun.
Anger. Although the social meaning of anger (Wut) appears to be
expressible mainly through the pronoun du, several participants stated that
the pronoun Sie can, in fact, also be used to express anger. For this to occur,
the individuals involved would have to be per du with one another;
that is, they would have to have the type of relationship in which du was an
accepted form of addressing the other. This relationship could be one of
friendship or membership in a club, for instance, and in a moment of anger,
the speaker would use the pronoun Sie to express that he or she is so
angry with the other individual that the basis for the du relationship (e.g.,
friendship) does not exist at that particular moment. In reference to such
an extreme type of situation, Fridolin, age 74, stated: “Yes, there are situations
in which you just start to say Sie when someone has really gotten you
angry” (the 4 other participants present during the interview with Fridolin
all agreed with this statement).
Social Meanings in German Interactions 347
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
It appears that there are two points of reference for the interlocutor’s
choice of which pronoun to use to express anger at a given moment: the
speakers’ relationship and the pronoun typically used between the speakers
to express this relationship. If the interlocutors are in a relationship in
which the informal pronoun du is the standard form of address, then a sudden
switch to the formal pronoun Sie by one interlocutor or both can be
understood as an expression of anger.
Arrogance. The term arrogance (Überheblichkeit) was chosen to
portray a compilation of social meanings found in the talk of the participants
such as “to act important” (“wichtig tun”), “being too confident”
(“zu selbstsicher sein”), “conceited” (“eingebildet”), and so forth. Participants
stated that the pronoun Sie used by an interlocutor can express arrogance
in situations in which the use of du would normally be expected. For
example, Gila, age 72, said she would expect to continue to say du to those
she went to grade school with, even if she had not seen them for many years.
When a member of her grade school class addressed her with Sie at a meeting
she attended, she labeled this woman “conceited” because she interpreted
the woman’s behavior as evidence she thought she was “too good” to
be spoken to with the familiar du pronoun. Similarly, Frau Richard, age 65,
told of a group of people who often spent time together and, due to this, decided
among themselves to employ the du pronoun with each other. One
woman, who had royal blood, according to Frau Richard, would not participate
in the group du and continued to use Sie with the members. Frau Richard
stated that the use of Sie in this scenario expressed that the woman
“thinks she’s something better” than the other members of the group.
Arrogance can be expressed in several ways with the formal Sie pronoun.
Such arrogance was accomplished when an interlocutor used a pronoun
that was deemed inappropriate by the other interlocutor, thus
resulting in negative evaluations of the first individual.
Authority. For participants, authority (Autorität) expressed a particular
social meaning for the pronoun Sie that referred to an individual’s
control or influence over another individual. The terms “authority”
(“Autorität”) and the phrase “authority structure” (“Autoritätsstruktur”)
were both prominent in the participants’ talk.
During my fieldwork in Germany, I worked with a professor in the
Department of Speech Communication at the University of Koblenz-
Landau. The professor and I had previously negotiated the symmetrical
use of du with one another, which meant that in both social and academic
348 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
situations, we spoke to one another using the informal pronoun. On one
occasion, however, I was asked to be a guest speaker in his seminar. I was
aware that I would be speaking in front of his students, all of whom addressed
him either using Sie and his first name or Sie with title and last
name. I was concerned that addressing him with the informal pronoun in a
class situation might be uncomfortable for him, his students, or both.
When I consulted with a student in the class with whom I had become
friends, she suggested that I switch to addressing the professor with the
formal Sie during the seminar so that it would not “undermine his authority”
with his students.
Surely not every German speaker would agree with the advice of my
friend. Using the informal pronoun du with the professor in this situation
would not have been a breach; however, I remained uncomfortable with
the situation, and not knowing how to remedy the personal circumstances
with the issue of academic authority, I chose to avoid addressing him directly
during the seminar.
Closeness. The term closeness can be described as persons being
strongly united due to a basis or feeling of respect, honor, or love. The social
meaning closeness, as it is used in this study, implies a certain level of
proximity or lack thereof.
Participants talked in negative terms about the value of closeness as it
is expressed through the Sie pronoun. Sie can be used to express when two
people “are not close to one another” (“Leute, die sich nicht nahe stehen”)
or when there exists “no closeness” (“keine Nähe”) between the interlocutors.
In general, the pronoun Sie was not thought to express positive levels
of closeness to others; rather, the pronoun Sie can be used to express when
the state of being close does not exist.
The social meaning closeness, even when it is spoken of with negative
values such as “lack of” or “no closeness,” should not be confused with the
social meaning distance. Closeness is a salient social meaning for German
speakers, and, in the talk of these interlocutors, lack of closeness was not
discussed as a synonym for the social meaning distance, but rather as a
separate entity. Therefore, the social meaning closeness (even when it is
discussed in terms of its nonexistence) appears to be valued by German interlocutors
as a social meaning that is separate and distinct from distance.
Coldness. Several participants expressed that the pronoun Sie can
display coldness (“Kälte”). Although this was not a frequently expressed
social meaning (three instances were found), it does appear to be an ex-
Social Meanings in German Interactions 349
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
pressible meaning that is recognizable to German speakers. I consulted my
two key informants on this, and both agreed that under certain circumstances,
a certain degree of coldness could be expressed by the formal pronoun
Sie.
Because the Sie pronoun is often used between individuals who display
“no closeness,” “no intimacy,” and so forth, it appears that the formal
pronoun displays a certain lack of feeling or fondness between two speakers,
which can be interpreted as a degree of coldness expressed in talk.
Conversableness. The term conversableness (Gesprächsfähigkeit)
was chosen to represent both the level of a person’s ability to converse with
another person or the conversational level or type, or both of these. This particular
social meaning subsumes a range of expressions concerning the
formal pronoun Sie. It is important to note that conversableness refers specifically
to the activity of speaking or the conversation between interlocutors
and not to the context surrounding the interlocutors. Thus, the way I
view myself, the person with whom I am speaking, and our relationship,
will strongly affect the ways we can or cannot talk with one another.
Participants stated that the formal pronoun Sie expresses that the level
of speaking between interlocutors is “more thought out” (“überlegter”),
“serious” (“ernst”), “more official” (“offizieller”), and “not very spontaneous”
(“nicht sehr spontan”). Stan, age 48, explained that his way of formulating
words also changes when he uses the formal pronoun Sie: “In the
cases when I use Sie, I start to speak more affected. I also start to speak
more dynamically, possibly also more strained.” Participants did not feel
as though they could relax as well in a conversation using Sie as when they
were using du, thus forcing them to give each word more thought and consideration
during an interaction.
Indeed, when interlocutors revealed that the use of the formal pronoun
Sie was concomitant to a speaker having to think about his or her
choice of words, topics, and ways of formulating sentences, this condition
was often evaluated as a negative result of using the pronoun Sie.
Dignity. Dignity (Würde) has to do with one’s worth as an individual
and his or her self-respect. For Mary, age 54, to be able to clearly
express dignity to some of her speech-impaired patients is of great importance
to her. Mary’s patients are often adults who, through an accident or
illness of some sort, have acquired a speech impairment that is at times so
grave that they have the speaking level of children. Mary explained that in
350 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
such cases, she must be careful not to employ the pronoun du, as she
would with a child, but to speak to the patient as an adult who has “dignity”
(“Würde”). This can be accomplished for Mary through the formal
pronoun Sie.
For Helga, age 43, the pronoun Sie expresses “the dignity of a human
being” (“die Würde eines Menschens”). Helga stated, “For me, each individual
has a certain dignity, and I respect this dignity in that I don’t just
use du with everyone.” Helga’s use of Sie toward people she does not
know well, or who are not her friends, expresses that the other individual
has self-worth that should be recognized. For Helga, such dignity cannot
be expressed through the informal pronoun du, but rather only through the
use of the formal pronoun Sie.
Distance. The term distance (Distanz, Abstand) was very prominent
in the talk of the participants when describing the social meanings available
for the pronoun Sie. Specifically, the term distance was expressed by
the participants a total of 45 times in reference to the formal pronoun.
Sie can express “distance” (“Distanz”), but it can also “keep a distance”
(“eine Distanz einhalten”) that already exists between interlocutors.
Participants used many metaphors to express distance as a lack of
spatial proximity of one sort or another, which can represent a lack of
emotional or relational proximity between interlocutors. One can use the
formal pronoun Sie to “keep someone at bay” (“sich jemanden vom Leibe
halten”) and Sie was also viewed by many participants as a “barrier”
(“Barriere”). Both of these metaphors have spatial characteristics of maintaining
distance between interlocutors and not allowing them to come too
close to one another.
Frequency of contact. The term frequency of contact (Kontakthäufigkeit)
was chosen to include how often two people interact with one
another and what this says about their particular relationship. For several
participants, the pronoun Sie expressed that two individuals saw each
other only “now and then” (“ab und zu”) or “occasionally” (“gelegentlich”).
How often two people interact can reflect the level of commitment that
they have to one another. In a relationship in which two people consider
themselves close or intimate with one another (a relationship in which the
informal pronoun du would most likely be employed), there is usually a period
of time during which the individuals see each other rather frequently.
This can, of course, change, if the two people move to different locations;
Social Meanings in German Interactions 351
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
however, the basis of the close and intimate relationship was most likely
formed during a period in which the two were able to see each other rather
often. (Such close, intimate relationships can, and often do, grow apart if the
two individuals cannot or do not make time for one another.)
The formal pronoun Sie can express that two individuals only meet
infrequently; thus, not allowing for the relationship to grow or become
close. The social meaning of frequency of contact was not found salient
for the informal pronoun du. This could point to the possibility that individuals
who use du with one another do not view how often they meet
each other as relevant because it is taken for granted. As soon as the frequency
of contact is low, it becomes a salient social meaning, therefore
only applying to the formal pronoun Sie for German speakers.
Friendship. The term friendship (Freundschaft) was chosen to subsume
the state of having a friendship with another individual and the state
of being friends or buddies. Although being “buddies” (“Kumpel”) may
be viewed as a lesser or more superficial form of friendship to some, for
the purposes of this study, being buddies is subsumed under the more general
social meaning of friendship.
There are certain social meanings for which the pronoun Sie can only
express the notion that the particular social meaning does not exist. In such
instances, the formal pronoun Sie does subsume the particular social
meaning but only in its negative form. As is the case with the social meaning
of closeness, most participants reported that the formal pronoun Sie
can only express nonexistent states of friendship; for example, the state of
“no friendship” (“keine Freundschaft”).
However, some participants disagreed with the notion that the formal
pronoun Sie could only be used to express that “no friendship” exists between
the interlocutors. While visiting the home of Herr and Frau Richard,
I was present for an afternoon get-together for coffee and cake (Kaffee und
Kuchen) to which Frau Richard, age 65, had invited several women also in
their 60s. I noted that Frau Richard addressed these women using Sie, although
from their conversation, it was evident the members of the group
knew each other fairly well. I later asked Frau Richard why she had used
the formal Sie pronoun with the group rather than the informal du. She explained,
“I don’t use the du as easily as my husband . . . I’m alone more
than he is, but that doesn’t mean that I don’t have friends whom I like, and
whom I say Sie to anyway.” The word anyway in this sentence points to
the usual tendency for people who are friends to say du to each other; that
352 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
is, although Frau Richard has people in her life she calls “friends”
(“Freunde”), she addresses them with the formal Sie pronoun despite this
relationship.
Frau Richard’s use of Sie to express “friends” may appear to be an exception
to the preferred social meaning of Sie; however, according to several
key informants, older individuals often employ the formal pronoun
Sie with individuals they would label as friends, without the use of this
pronoun representing any lesser form of the friendship. In Frau Richard’s
case, it is simply a matter of Sie being her preferred or standard form of address,
and were Frau Richard to use du with these friends, this pronoun
would most likely imply more intimacy than Frau Richard views appropriate
for these relationships.
Intimacy. The social meaning of intimacy (Intimität) was not as
salient as other social meanings in the participants’ talk about pronoun use;
a reference to intimacy was made a total of seven times in relation to pronouns
of address. This may be due to the possibility of speakers counting intimacy
as rather similar to closeness. I have chosen, however, to categorize
intimacy as a social meaning separate from closeness for two reasons: (a)
The term intimacy was, in fact, a salient term in the talk of the participants
that stood on its own and was not necessarily employed as a replacement for
the term closeness, and (b) intimacy often includes other characteristics,
such as affection, that are not necessarily components of closeness.
Once again, Sie was found to express a negative value of a particular
social meaning. For Georg, age 33, the formal pronoun Sie expresses “no
intimacy” (“keine Intimität”). Although only 1 participant referred to the
social meaning of “no intimacy” for the pronoun Sie, key informants have
agreed that this is an expressible social meaning and not necessarily an idiosyncratic
one.
Isolation. According to some participants, the formal pronoun Sie
can also express isolation (“Isolation”). To these German speakers, the
pronoun Sie can be used to actively “isolate” (“isolieren”) one person
from the group, making that individual an “outsider” (“Außenseiter”).
This was the case for Helga, age 43, when she went to meet her present
husband’s family for the first time. Everyone in the room said du to
one another, and only Helga was spoken to with the formal pronoun Sie.
When asked what this use of Sie meant to her, Helga stated, “Isolation—
you feel like you’re in the wrong place . . . you feel very isolated, and it
also hurts somehow.” For Helga, when her present husband’s family used
Social Meanings in German Interactions 353
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Sie with her, this expressed to her that she was isolated from their group
and was not welcome to become an insider.
The social meaning of isolation seems to stand in stark contrast to the
social meaning of belonging, which was found salient only for the informal
pronoun du. It is important to note that isolation can only be expressed
through the pronoun Sie if the group employing this pronoun has based
their interactions on a common du. Without the contrast of a group du to
one individual’s receipt of Sie, the social meaning of isolation, in reference
to a pronoun of address, cannot exist.
Knowing other. The social meaning of knowing other (jemanden
kennen) refers to the degree to which one person believes him- or herself to
know another person (as opposed to a thing or object). This particular social
meaning includes how well or not so well a person can understand another
individual’s actions or expressed thoughts and feelings, or both, based on
how long or how well the person has been acquainted with another.
For German interlocutors, the formal pronoun Sie can express that
someone is “a stranger” (“eine fremde Person”), that he or she is “unknown”
(“unbekannt”), that the other is “someone you don’t know”
(“jemand, den du nicht kennst”), or someone you “don’t know well”
(“nicht gut kennt”). Once again, it appears that the formal pronoun Sie is
used by interlocutors to express a negative degree or lack of a particular
social meaning. In the case of knowing other, the formal pronoun Sie can
express that a speaker “doesn’t know the person” (“die Person nicht
kennen”) and that the other is an “unknown person” (“unbekannte Person”)
or even a “stranger” (“Fremder”).
Liking. Although some may argue that liking (Sympathie) should be
subsumed under the social meaning friendship, it was counted as a separate
social meaning for two reasons: (a) Liking was a salient social meaning
for the German native speakers that was uttered separately from other
social meanings, and (b) there are situations in which individuals count
one another as friends without necessarily liking each other or one another’s
characteristics.
In reference to the formal pronoun Sie, participants made the social
meaning liking salient in their talk. Specifically, Sie can be used to express
“you don’t like each other” (“man ist sich unsympatisch”), “I really don’t
like him” (“er ist mir sehr unsympatisch”), and “absolutely no liking”
(“überhaupt keine Sympathie”). The pronoun Sie appears to express only
354 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
varied negative gradations and no positive gradations of the social meaning
of liking.
Personal. When something is deemed personal, it can be understood
to pertain to a certain person or that person’s character, personality,
conduct, intimate affairs, or all of these (Guralnik, 1984). For German
speakers participating in this study, the social meaning of personal
(persönlich) was somewhat salient for the formal second-person pronoun
Sie, specifically in its negative form.
When German participants spoke of the social meaning personal, they
were referring to the characteristics, secrets, or intrigues that one person
may or may not share with another. Esther, age 23, said that the formal
pronoun Sie allows for “absolutely nothing personal” (“überhaupt nichts
Persönliches”) about another person to be revealed. Annel, age 74, also
admitted that with certain individuals with whom she has used the formal
Sie pronoun, “the personal part was then missing” (“das Persönliche hat
dann gefehlt”), and this pronoun can even be deemed “too impersonal”
(“zu unpersönlich”) at times.
Politeness. When one person shows good manners toward another
person, is courteous, or considerate, this person may be labeled polite. Participants
in this study stated that when the formal pronoun Sie was employed
by one speaker to another, the social meaning of politeness
(Höflichkeit) may be a component of what is being expressed between the
two interlocutors.
Many participants stated this general rule: “I always speak to strangers
with Sie” (Frau Richard, age 65). The use of Sie when speaking with
strangers would be labeled by most German speakers as a convention;
however, when asked what the pronoun Sie addressed to strangers expresses,
participants such as Anna, age 31, stated that this particular Sie
expresses a “basic courtesy” (“Grundhöflichkeit”) toward the stranger.
Rudi, age 36, stated that if he were to meet someone older than himself,
he would use the formal Sie pronoun “out of politeness” (“aus
Höflichkeit”). For Rudi, Sie also signals that the level of conversation is
“polite” (“höflich”) and not “buddylike” (“kumpelhaft”). Herr Schuster,
age 78, also insisted that there is a “certain politeness” (“eine gewisse
Höflichkeit”) expressed to the other person when Sie is used. For Herr
Schuster, the formal Sie is necessary to speak to those whom he does not
know, but toward whom he wishes to be considerate and courteous.
Social Meanings in German Interactions 355
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Power. To fully understand the social meaning of power, it is the
point of reference for German interlocutors that must be taken into account.
According to the German speakers with whom I have spoken and
my own personal experience while living in Germany, it is assumed that if
two individuals employ the same pronoun (du–du or Sie–Sie) with each
other, they are, generally speaking, on equal ground with one another; that
is, one speaker does not necessarily have power (the ability to influence
another individual) over the other. If, however, there is an asymmetrical
use of pronouns between the two individuals (e.g., one person receives Sie
but may say du), this can point to a difference in power between the two
individuals, although this difference in power is not an automatic product
of asymmetrical pronoun use.
For example, if a boss were to demand that a secretary use only Sie
with him or her, but in return, takes the liberty of saying du to the secretary,
this can point to the exertion of power by the boss over the secretary.
In such a scenario, the pronoun Sie can express power, when one assumes
the reference point of the secretary. When the secretary says Sie to the
boss, he or she defers to the power of the boss. In comparison, when the
boss employs the pronoun du when speaking with the secretary, the du is
an assertion of the boss’s power.
Asymmetrical pronoun use between two individuals can, in some situations,
express power differences between the speakers. Within the realm
of asymmetrical pronoun use, both the formal pronoun Sie and the informal
pronoun du can express the social meaning of power depending on the
respective reference point. It should be noted, however, that in this study,
the social meaning of power was found most prominently in interlocutors’
talk about the formal pronoun Sie rather than du.
Rejection. For one person to reject another person, a denial or nonacceptance
of the other person must occur. The rejected individual is unwanted
and, metaphorically, discarded by either a group or another
person. Such rejection (Ablehnung) can be accomplished in various ways.
According to some participants in this study, rejection can be expressed
through the formal pronoun Sie—a social meaning that was not found for
the informal pronoun du.
Rudi, age 36, described a colleague at his workplace with whom he
had fairly quickly developed a relationship in which the informal du pronoun
was used in interactions. When Rudi’s colleague moved to a higher
position, however, this colleague began using the formal pronoun Sie with
356 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Rudi, as he had when they had first met. Rudi stated, “I’ve never experienced
anything like it, that someone goes back to Sie after having said
du—and at first I thought—what a jerk.” Rudi later stated that he found
the whole situation very odd, and he interpreted this particular use of Sie
as one that expressed his colleague’s rejection of himself.
The social meaning of rejection was often found salient in similar
contexts as isolation. The main difference between rejection and isolation
for the German speakers I interviewed was whether the action stemmed
from a group or an individual. It appears that a group can isolate a single
individual by using the formal Sie to place them outside of the circle of
membership of that group. When the action stems from one individual,
however, this is viewed as an expression of the social meaning of rejection
of one person toward another. It appears difficult, if not impossible, for an
individual to isolate another individual unless the membership of a group
is at stake.
Relationship. The pronoun Sie can also be employed by German
speakers to express a certain type of relationship (Beziehung) between two
individuals. The term “relationship” (“Beziehung”) is highlighted here because
this was the term that was consistently salient across the participants’
utterances. There are, however, various types of relationships that
each pronoun can express according to the participants in this study.
The social meaning of relationship was only minimally salient in German
speakers’ talk about the formal pronoun Sie. In the three instances
found, the relationship expressed by Sie was “a business relationship”
(“eine geschäftliche Beziehung”); that is, the type of relationship that exists
between a salesclerk and a customer, or the relationship between two
individuals working together in a company. The relationship expressed by
the pronoun Sie was one that was defined by its context or the place in
which the relationship was formed and maintained; that is, in a business.
Speakers said nothing about the types of interpersonal feelings associated
with this relationship, as was the case for the du pronoun, in which case
speakers described their feelings of closeness, intimacy, warmth, and so
forth with the other individual.
One could argue that each of these expressions should not be considered
under the social meaning of relationship, but rather they should be
categorized according to the adjectives used to describe the relationship;
for example, a “closer relationship” (found only for the informal du pronoun)
should be counted under the social meaning of closeness and not re-
Social Meanings in German Interactions 357
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
lationship. It appears, however, that speakers identify the relationship they
have with another individual as an important and salient component to
their interpersonal lives; that is, the relationship is a recognized unit with
boundaries that can be identified and described. For this reason, relationship
has been categorized as an individual, salient social meaning that can
be distinguished from other social meanings that have emerged in the talk
of the participants of this study.
Respect. There were 26 instances of the social meaning respect
(Respekt) found for the formal pronoun Sie. Respect can be viewed as
one’s admiration for, honoring of, or deference toward another individual,
the state of being esteemed or admired by another, or both.
Most of the participants stated that Sie can express “respect”; however,
included under the social meaning respect are two mentions of “appreciation”
(“Anerkennung”) displayed toward another individual and one
mention of “esteem” (“Wertschätzung”) granted to another person through
the use of the pronoun Sie. A few individuals also placed the respect that
the Sie pronoun can express in a less neutral context. Jakob, age 37, spoke
of a “basic respect” (“Grundachtung”) that a person would have for a
stranger; to express this type of respect, Jakob would use the formal pronoun
Sie. Helga, age 43, described her use of Sie to express “a respect for
younger people.” In this particular case, Helga was referring to the fact
that many Germans, after reaching a certain age, address younger people
(adolescents) with the informal du pronoun, expressing the social meaning
of age or age difference. Helga, however, attempts to use the pronoun Sie
with these younger people to show them her respect for their individuality
and adulthood; that is, they are not lower than she is, or undeserving of respect,
simply because they are younger. Finally, Sie can be used to show
that one “really respects” another individual (Berthold, age 55)—this respect
is of a higher level than the basic respect expressed by most participants
for the pronoun Sie.
Solidarity. A feeling of solidarity (Solidarität) can exist when an interest
outside of the self is held common to more than one individual. It is
a feeling of unity or commonality between people that can be based on
group membership. It is important to note that solidarity is grounded on
something outside of the relationship between the two individuals (e.g., a
group, organization, club, etc.) and is not based on the mutual penetration
of individuals’ psychological worlds, as is often the case in a friendship.
358 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Solidarity is most often expressed through the informal du pronoun.
According to the German participants in this study, the formal Sie can only
express degrees of nonsolidarity. For instance, one participant stated that
Sie can express that “he is not a part of the common cause” (“er gehört
nicht zur gemeinsamen Sache”). Stan, age 48, commented that this form of
nonsolidarity reveals that there exists a common cause that binds everyone
except the person or people with whom we use the formal pronoun Sie.
Walter, age 49, revealed an example of this nonsolidary Sie when he
described his days of playing handball on a team when he was in college.
All of the members of the team and the coach said du to one another. Many
of the participants in this study explained that the common du is usually
employed in sports because the team members are all bound together by
the sport or to win the game—both are forms of solidarity. Walter explained
that, although the team members and the coach used du with one
another, everyone involved said Sie to the referees. The referees were not
members of the team, and they were not bound to the team members
through a common cause. They were there to judge the team, to give or
take away points, and for this reason they were spoken to by the team
members with a nonsolidary Sie.
Status. The term status (Status) was chosen to represent expressions
of social meaning referring to the position, level, or rank of one individual
in comparison to another. Whether a speaker views the other individual
with whom he or she is speaking as inferior, equal, or superior to him- or
herself can be expressed through pronominal use.
In the case of status, the reference point of the person speaking is of
importance. When two speakers are employing a symmetrical use of Sie
with one another, this use can express a certain equality between the two
individuals; however, the level is often viewed as one that is an “official
level” (“offizielle Ebene”) as, for example, the “social level” (“das soziale
Niveau”) between an employee and a customer. Within the realm of asymmetrical
use—that is, one person says du to another, whereas receiving the
Sie pronoun in return—the person receiving the pronoun Sie might view
the individual to whom he or she says du “in low regard” (“Geringschätzung”).
Structured. The term structured (strukturiert) was chosen to embody
a variety of expressions made by various participants in reference to
the overall atmosphere of an interaction between two interlocutors, which,
in turn, often has an effect on the manner in which the speakers discur-
Social Meanings in German Interactions 359
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
sively deal with one another. In other words, the momentary relationship
that two people have with each other during an interaction has much to do
with the level of conversation and the general atmosphere surrounding the
conversation at the time. The conversational atmosphere has an effect on
the relationship of the speakers and vice versa.
Various comments were made by interviewees concerning Sie and
what this pronoun can express or create between two interlocutors. For example,
Ludwig, age 24, believed that Sie expresses “something official”
(“etwas Offizielles”) about the situation at hand. Hartmut, age 30+, agreed
with this characterization of the pronoun Sie by stating that there is something
“more formal” (interview in English) about a conversation conducted
using this pronoun.
Georg, age 33, said that when the pronoun Sie is used in a conversation,
the atmosphere is “stiffer” (“steifer”), and, at times, everything
seems “more complicated” (“komplizierter”) than when the informal pronoun
du is employed. He added that, for him, the pronoun Sie expresses
that “everything here is well ordered” (“hier ist alles wohl geordnet”) and
“everyone here has his place” (“hier hat so jeder seinen Bereich”). Stan,
age 48, added to this notion by stating that Sie expresses that a level of
“discipline” (“Disziplin”) is also expected from the interlocutors.
The social meaning of structured expresses something about the interaction
itself and the momentary relationship between the interlocutors.
The formal Sie appears to have an effect on the way speakers view a situation
and what type of behavior is expected from them when interacting
with other speakers. The social meaning structured reflects an orderliness
and lack of spontaneity within an interaction; thus, strongly affecting the
ways in which interlocutors view one another.
THE GERMAN CASE AND BEYOND:
TESTING THE ADEQUACY OF EXTANT
MODELS OF SOCIAL MEANING
Given the account that I have provided of how Germans talk about
their uses of and interpretations of Sie, there appear to be two possible directions
that an interpretation of the German case could take. The first of
these would display how the social meanings for Sie could be subsumed
360 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
by the more parsimonious models of such scholars as Brown and Gilman
(1960), Birtchnell (1993), Friedrich (1972), Danziger (1976), and others.
To take this first direction would be to argue that the findings for the German
social meanings of Sie can be mapped onto a two- or three-dimensional
model of meanings. Let us examine what happens when the German
social meanings found are applied to such parsimonious models.
The classic Brown and Gilman (1960) two-dimensional model (supported
also by Hudson, 1996) claims that all social meanings in every language
can be mapped somewhere onto the vertical axis of power or the
horizontal axis of solidarity (see also, Birtchnell, 1993). Indeed, there are
many of the 25 social meanings of Sie that can be subsumed under either
of these axes. For example, one could make the case that such social
meanings as authority, power, and respect could be mapped onto the
power axis, and relationship, rejection, and solidarity could be mapped
onto the solidarity axis, among others.
The task becomes more complicated, however, when one attempts to
subsume, for example, the social meanings of intimacy, conversableness,
and structured under these two axes. Solidarity can be described as a feeling
of unity or commonality between people that can be based on group
membership. Intimacy, on the other hand, refers to individuals being
united by something they hold between each other—for example, affection
for one another—rather than through a commonality outside of the
relationship. Therefore, although solidarity and intimacy could, theoretically,
coexist, solidarity does not subsume intimacy, as is the case in the
Brown and Gilman (1960) two-dimensional model. The social meanings
of conversableness and structured, according to German speakers, refer to
the conversational level, type, or atmosphere between speakers using the
pronoun Sie. These social meanings do not fit neatly onto either the power
or solidarity axes but appear to stand outside of both of these dimensions.
I have provided only a few examples of German social meanings that
prove difficult to map onto a parsimonious two-dimensional model. It appears
that each of Brown and Gilman’s (1960) dimensions includes so
many poorly defined variations or aspects of interpersonal relationships
that those social meanings German speakers understand to be distinct and
separately meaningful can hardly be distinguished in such a model. Brown
(1965) pointed to this particular issue himself, when he characterized his
use of the terms solidarity and power as “maximally general” and went on
to write: “We need some scheme for classifying relations more narrowly, a
scheme that will help us to see regularities and to understand them” (p.
Social Meanings in German Interactions 361
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
73). Perhaps the simplicity of the Brown and Gilman model aided its continued
use by various researchers in recent publications (e.g., Hudson,
1996); however, when a model’s simplicity stands in the way of its ability
to represent important distinctions and complexities of communicative
practices, such a model’s theoretical import must be called into question.
There have been attempts to make the classic two-dimensional model
more complex by adding a third dimension. Friedrich (1972), for example,
in his study of Russian personal pronoun use, called into question the adequacy
of the power and solidarity dimensions by separating intimacy as a
third dimension. This separation allows such German social meanings as
closeness, friendship, isolation, liking, and perhaps even knowing other
to be more easily accounted for, as these are not necessarily aspects
of solidary relationships but rather more often come into play when
interlocutors share something between each other (rather than outside the
relationship; e.g., a common interest) and have penetrated one another’s
interpersonal worlds.
Although Friedrich (1972) did make the important move to distinguish
solidarity and intimacy as two distinct meanings that cannot be represented
in the same dimension of semantic space, his model continues to
combine other distinct social meanings, such as power and status, as is
also the case in the Brown and Gilman (1960) model. Although power and
status can go hand in hand, a person who has higher status than another individual
does not necessarily have power to influence that individual (e.g.,
the chief executive officer of one company has higher status but no power
over a manager in another company). Furthermore, those German social
meanings relating to the atmosphere or conversational level between interlocutors
(e.g., conversableness and structured) also appear to have no
place in Friedrich’s three-dimensional model. Thus, Friedrich’s addition
of intimacy as a third dimension does move us toward a model that can
more readily account for the distinctiveness of complex meaning systems;
however, even three dimensions cannot account for all of the social meanings
found for the German case.
In taking the first possible direction of interpretation, I have been able
to show that to a great extent the more parsimonious models can account
for the data I have assembled for the German formal pronoun Sie. However,
I have also shown that some of the German data do not fit neatly into
such models. For example, the meanings of conversableness, status, and
structured would have to be force fit into even a three-dimensional
scheme. When one examines the German data even further, it would in-
362 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
deed be difficult to map such meanings as age, adulthood, anger, and even
dignity onto a two- or three-dimensional model.
It appears, then, that a second direction must be taken in accounting
for the data I have presented—a direction I now turn to. Communication
scholars Burgoon and Hale (1984) argued against those models that have
narrowed interpersonal behavior down to two or three basic dimensions:
Although the parsimony achieved by these reductive perspectives is certainly desirable
for many purposes, a danger in completely embracing them to account specifically
for the class of behavior called relational communication is that it may promote
an unduly narrow, simplistic view of relational communication content. It may mask
the diversity of relational message themes, or topoi, that are possible and may lead to
an underestimate of how much relational meaning is present in a typical exchange. (p.
194)
Burgoon and Hale (1984) argued that interlocutors can express their
relational messages along 12 distinct but interrelated themes. Burgoon
and Hale (1987) exposed this set of 12 relational themes to empirical
verification and narrowed them to 8 separate relational dimensions: immediacy–
affection (intimacy I), similarity–depth (intimacy II), receptivity–
trust (intimacy III), composure, formality, dominance, equality, and
task orientation.
Thus, Burgoon and Hale (1987) moved away from a more parsimonious
model relying on only a few dimensions to a model allowing for more
complexity and distinctiveness between meanings to emerge. When the
data from the German case are applied to Burgoon and Hale’s (1987)
eight-dimensional model, many of the German meanings can be accounted
for (i.e., authority, closeness, coldness, conversableness, distance,
friendship, intimacy, knowing other, liking, politeness, power, status, and
structured). The force of this model is that it allows each social meaning to
be represented by dimensions that are more narrowly defined, thus allowing
for finer distinctions to be made between meanings. Despite the
model’s strength, however, there remain almost half of the German meanings
that do not fit neatly into one of the previously mentioned dimensions;
that is, adulthood, age, anger, arrogance, dignity, frequency of
contact, isolation, personal, relationship, rejection, respect, and solidarity.
Burgoon and Hale’s (1987) work appears to be on the right track to
providing a model that has a sound communication focus and attempts to
account for the complexities of social meaning in interpersonal interactions.
Unfortunately, although the authors attempted to provide more com-
Social Meanings in German Interactions 363
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
plexity of semantic dimensions, there remain many of the German social
meanings that cannot be accounted for by their model.
Having conducted tests of two-, three-, and even eight-dimensional
models of social meaning with data from the German case, one may ask if
available theories for interpreting social meanings (e.g., Brown, 1965;
Burgoon & Hale, 1984, 1987; Friedrich, 1972) provide a useful starting
point in making those interpretations. The answer to this question is not a
definitive yes or no. Current theories of social meaning are quite helpful in
directing us to certain universal dimensions of meaning that are expressed
through pronominal use in various languages. However, as I have displayed,
these models cannot completely account for German interlocutors’
situated expressions and interpretations of the formal pronoun Sie.
Not only are many of the German meanings left unaccounted for in the
various models tested, but the possibility of multiple meanings expressed simultaneously
in interaction also remains hidden in these models. Each time
an interlocutor utters the Sie pronoun, he or she expresses a variety of social
meanings at once. Thus, the combination of social meanings will vary, as
well as the weight given to each social meaning, every time the utterance of
a particular pronoun occurs. Such variations in the combinations and
weighting of social meanings depend on the particular communicative context
and, specifically, the relationship between the interlocutors.
It appears, then, that the extant models of social meaning provide a
useful guide; however, they mask much of the distinctive particularity of
social meanings between interlocutors and the possibility for multiple
meanings to be expressed simultaneously. This insight seems to beg the
question, what type of model can include all of the social meanings available
to interlocutors without sacrificing the representation of each social
meaning’s distinctiveness and complexity?
Perhaps the answer lies in moving away from determinate, parsimonious
schemes that claim universality to more interpretive, ethnographically
based ones. Kendall (1981) argued that most semantic theories are “formulated
without reference to speaker’s intent or addressee’s interpretation
of speaker’s intent” (p. 237). The study reported here explicates a culturally
distinct system of meaning for a particular communicative resource as
expressed and interpreted by the interlocutors themselves. No attempt was
made to force various components of the system into a more economic
scheme of several larger categories, for this move toward parsimony only
masks the distinctiveness of each component and the complexity of the
system as a whole.
364 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
It appears that by starting with grounded, ethnographic data of speakers’
communicative choices and their interpretations of these that we can
come to better understand the distinctive and complex systems of interpersonal
relating that underlie daily interactions. Certainly, Burgoon and
Hale’s (1987) work began to move us away from models that represent interpersonal
relating with only broad, poorly defined dimensions toward a
schema that allows the intricacies of human communication to be better
accounted for. Indeed, such an interpretive approach allows us to move
from a causal, deterministic, theory-driven view of interpersonal relating
to one that works from the ground up, from data based in interlocutors’
meanings and interpretations of their own communicative choices to theories
that remain faithful to interlocutors’ intricate meaning systems.
CONCLUSIONS
This study provides an overview of the various social meanings available
to German speakers through the use of the formal German pronoun
Sie. The results point to 25 distinct social meanings that German speakers
understand themselves to be expressing through their pronominal choice
to say Sie instead of the informal pronoun du. Further research in this area
would most likely uncover other social meanings that are not accounted
for in this study, and it is through such continued research that a fuller understanding
can be gained of what German speakers accomplish socially
through specific communicative choices. This study provides a solid
framework for future research both in the German context and for comparative
studies of other languages.
One limitation of this study is that it took only limited account of participants’
gender, age, social class, place of residence, and dialect as factors
that may have affected the social meanings found. Indeed, the attempt
was made to represent equally gender, age, and occupation through the
sampling of interview participants; however, the majority of participants
in this study grew up in and spoke the dialects of the Rhineland-Palatinate
region. The possibility exists that certain region-specific or dialect-specific
social meanings may not be expressed by speakers in all areas of Germany,
thus limiting the generalizability of some of the social meanings
found here.
Social Meanings in German Interactions 365
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
There may be certain regions in Germany in which some of the 25 social
meanings are expressed rarely during interactions, if at all; however,
this does not challenge the fact that the 25 social meanings found in this
study generally remain available resources to all German speakers. This
study does not focus on the question of how often a particular social meaning
is expressed by German speakers, but rather, the goal was to discover
what social meanings are available to German speakers for expression. Indeed,
of the research known to me at the present time, this study has provided
the most extensive summary of social meanings of any study
concerning German pronoun use thus far.
In sum, the analysis of native speakers’ metapragmatic talk about
their communicative choices proved to be a rich resource for uncovering
interlocutors’ “means of speech [. . .] and their meanings to those who use
them” (Hymes, 1972, p. 2). Ultimately, studies such as the one reported
here can better inform our current models of interpersonal communication,
forcing future theoretical development to match the results of
grounded, ethnographic research. Claims of universality can be tested rigorously
with concrete data, pointing instead to the possibility of culturally
distinct systems of social meaning. In the end, research in this area can expand
our knowledge of the links between culture and communication, resulting
in the possible enhancement of cultural understanding between
individuals and societies.
NOTES
1 It should be noted that Brown (1965) appeared to be one of the first authors to propose a
link between the two-dimensional spatial model of social meaning and pronouns of address;
however, there exists a long history of literature pertaining to the spatial model
prior to Brown. This history is based in the works of such authors as Bateson (1935,
1958); Eysenck (1954); Leary (1957); Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum (1957); and
Schutz (1966), among others.
2 I have formally studied the German language for 9 years in the United States and 6
years in Germany. I have completed a translation certification program from Rutgers
University in New Jersey (1988) and have been employed as a freelance translator. I am
responsible for all translations presented in this study. When providing translations
from German to English, I attempted to take into account certain stylistic considerations;
for instance, idiomatic expressions were not literalized, but rather corresponding
English idiomatic expressions were provided whenever possible. Finally, I attended
366 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
to but did not seek to provide English equivalents for any dialectical or non-normative
level utterances.
REFERENCES
Amendt, G. (1995). Du oder Sie [Du or Sie]. Fulda, Germany: Ikaru Verlag.
Banks, S. (1989). Power pronouns and the language of intercultural understanding. In S.
Ting-Toomey & F. Korzenny (Eds.), Language, communication, and culture (pp.
180–198). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Bates, E., & Benigni, L. (1975). Rules of address in Italy: A sociological survey. Language
in Society, 4, 271–288.
Bateson, G. (1935). Culture contact and schismogenesis. Man, 35, 178–183.
Bateson, G. (1958). Naven (2nd ed.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Birtchnell, J. (1993). How humans relate: A new interpersonal theory. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Bochner, A. P., Kaminski, E. P., & Fitzpatrick, M. (1977). The conceptual domain of interpersonal
behavior: A factor analytic study. Human Communication Research, 3,
291–302.
Braun, F. (1988). Terms of address: Problems of patterns and usage in various languages
and cultures. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Brown, R. (1965). Social psychology. New York: Free Press.
Brown, R., & Ford, M. (1961). Address in American English. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 62, 375–385.
Brown, R., & Gilman, A. (1960). The pronouns of power and solidarity. In P. P. Giglioli
(Ed.), Language and social context (pp. 252–282). London: Cox & Wyman.
Burgoon, J. K., & Hale, J. L. (1984). The fundamental topoi of relational communication.
Communication Monographs, 51, 193–214.
Burgoon, J. K., & Hale, J. L. (1987). Validation and measurement of the fundamental
themes of relational communication. Communication Monographs, 54, 19–41.
Cameron, D. (1997). Demythologizing sociolinguistics. In N. Coupland & A. Jaworski
(Eds.), Sociolinguistics: A reader (pp. 55–67). New York: St. Martin’s.
Danziger, K. (1976). Interpersonal communication. New York: Pergamon.
de Fina, A. (1995). Pronominal choice, identity, and solidarity in political discourse. Text,
15, 379–410.
Delisle, H. H. (1986). Intimacy, solidarity, and distance: The pronouns of address in German.
Die Unterrichtspraxis, 19(1), 4–15.
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (1995). Writing ethnographic fieldnotes. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Eysenck, J. (1954). The psychology of politics. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Social Meanings in German Interactions 367
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Fitch, K. (1991). The interplay of linguistic universals and cultural knowledge in personal
address: Colombian madre terms. Communication Monographs, 58, 254–272.
Fitch, K. (1998). Speaking relationally: Culture, communication, and interpersonal connection.
New York: Guilford.
Foley, W. A. (1997). Anthropological linguistics: An introduction. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Friedrich, P. (1972). Social context and semantic feature: The Russian pronominal usage.
In J. J. Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.), Directions in sociolinguistics: The ethnography
of communication (pp. 407–434). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Geertz, C. (1960). Religion of Java. New York: Free Press.
Guralnik, D. B. (Ed.). (1984). Webster’s new world dictionary of the American language
(2nd ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster.
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (1995). Ethnography: Principles in practice. London:
Routledge.
Hanks, W. F. (1993). Metalanguage and pragmatics of deixis. In J. A. Lucy (Ed.), Reflexive
language: Reported speech and metapragmatics (pp. 127–157). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Haugen, E. (1975). Pronominal address in Icelandic: From you-two to you-all. Language
in Society, 4, 323–339.
Hudson, R. A. (1996). Sociolinguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hymes, D. (1962). The ethnography of speaking. In T. Gladwin &W. C. Sturtevant (Eds.),
Anthropology and human behavior (pp. 13–53). Washington, DC: Anthropological
Society of Washington.
Hymes, D. (1972). Editorial introduction. Language in Society, 1, 1–14.
Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in sociolinguistics: An ethnographic approach. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania.
Kempf, R. (1985). Pronouns and terms of address in neues Deutschland. Language in Society,
14, 223–237.
Kendall, M. B. (1981). Toward a semantic approach to terms of address: A critique of
deterministic models in sociolinguistics. Language & Communication, 1(2/3),
237–254.
Keshavarz, M. H. (1988). Forms of address in post-revolutionary Iranian Persian: A
sociolinguistic analysis. Language in Society, 17, 565–575.
Leary, T. (1957). Interpersonal diagnosis of personality. New York: Ronald.
Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (1989). Communication in everyday life. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Mehrabian, A. (1971). Silent messages. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Mertz, E. (1993). Learning what to ask: Metapragmatic factors and methodological reification.
In J. A. Lucy (Ed.), Reflexive language: Reported speech and metapragmatics
(pp. 159–174). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Misra, K. S. (1977). Terms of address and second person pronominal usage in Hindi: A
sociolinguistic study. Chandigarh, India: Bahri.
368 Michaela R. Winchatz
Downloaded By: [Purdue University Libraries] At: 22:12 20 April 2008
Mühlhäuser, P., & Harré, R. (1990). Pronouns and people: The linguistic construction of
social and personal identity. Cambridge, England: Basil Blackwell.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957). The measurement of meaning. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Parkinson, D. B. (1985). Constructing the social context of communication: Terms of address
in Egyptian Arabic. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Paulston, C. B. (1976). Pronouns of address in Swedish. Language in Society, 14, 359–386.
Philipsen, G. (1992). Speaking culturally: Explorations in social communication. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Philipsen, G., & Huspek, M. (1985). A bibliography of sociolinguistic studies of personal
address. Anthropological Linguistics, 27, 94–101.
Schutz, W. C. (1966). The interpersonal underworld. Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior
Books.
Sequeira, D. L. (1993). Personal address as negotiated meaning in an American church
community. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 26, 259–285.
Slobin, D. I. (1963). Some aspects of the use of pronouns of address in Yiddish. Word, 19,
193–202.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J. H., & Jackson, D. D. (1967). Pragmatics of human communication:
A study of interactional patterns, pathologies, and paradoxes. New York:
Norton.
Winchatz, M. R. (1997). Social meanings in talk: An ethnographic analysis of the German
pronouns du and Sie. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Washington.
Zhucheng, J. (1991). The “depreciation” and “appreciation” of some address terms in
China. Language in Society, 20, 387–390.
Social Meanings in German Interactions 369